# Introduction to SOAP

SOAP stands for `Simple Object Access Protocol` and is an XML based network protocol used for accessing web services. 

    ```
    Originally, the name SOAP was used as an acronym for "Simple Object Access Protocol". However, since this name doesn’t really fit the protocol (it's neither simple, nor does it only access objects), SOAP is now only used as a name.
    ```

SOAP was designed by Bob Atkinson, Don Box, Dave Winer, and Mohsen Al-Ghosein at Microsoft in 1998. 

"SOAP has been in use since the 1990s to enable communication between a client — for example, the Internet browser — and a server’s services. For this to work, the client must make requests to the API. The SOAP framework governs how these requests should appear. However—and this is a great advantage of SOAP — application-specific data can be accommodated within this set of rules. This way, web services can provide diverse applications. SOAP only sets the basic rules so that they don’t all have to have the same syntax to be used as a web service."

"In most cases, SOAP will also be integrated in HTTP. The transport therefore functions using the known protocol and is integrated into its structure. In practice, an HTTP message with a SOAP request looks like this:"


```
POST /example HTTP/1.1
Host: example.org
Content-Type: text/xml; charset=utf-8
…
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<SOAP-ENV:Envelope
xmlns:SOAP-ENV="http://www.w3.org/2003/05/soap-envelope"
SOAP-ENV:encodingStyle="http://www.w3.org/2001/12/soap-encoding">
...
   <SOAP-ENV:Header>
      ...
   </SOAP-ENV:Header>

   <SOAP-ENV:Body>
      ...
   </SOAP-ENV:Body>

</SOAP_ENV:Envelope>

```

"In this example, the request starts with an HTTP header. Then the so-called SOAP envelope follows. As its name suggests, this wraps up the actual content of the message. Basic elements of SOAP are then the header and body.

    Header: The header of the SOAP request contains metadata, for example, on the encryption used. Its use is optional.
    Body: The body of the message contains the actual data.

The terms used in the body ultimately have nothing to do with SOAP itself, but are entirely application-dependent.

The protocol is often combined with the [Web Services Description Language (WSDL)](3.The-WSDL-File.md). This is a description language specifically for web services, which, in turn, is platform-independent. The client determines from the WSDL file which options it has for a SOAP request. Therefore, WSDL and SOAP together allow two different systems to communicate with each other without any previous adjustments."

SOAP is an alternative to REST (although REST is not a protocol).

SOAP is generally prefered, when security is more important.

WS-Security (specifications on security aspects relating to web services) is firmly anchored in the network protocol. The handling of errors is also better regulated in SOAP (compared to REST), as a function for request repetition is directly integrated here.

To read more continue with [The WSDL File](3.The-WSDL-File.md).
To see all the content related to SOAP go to [Table of Contents](2.Table-of-Contents.md)